.. _Use uv for Python dependency management:

Use uv for Python dependency management
########################################

Status
******

Accepted

Context
*******

Since 2018, :ref:`OEP-18 Python Dependency Management` has defined the standard
workflow for Python dependencies in Open edX repositories:

* Direct dependencies declared in ``requirements/*.in`` files

* ``pip-compile`` (from `pip-tools`_) generates pinned ``requirements/*.txt``
  lockfiles

* ``pip-sync`` installs exactly those pinned versions into a virtualenv

* ``make upgrade`` orchestrates the whole process

This workflow has served the project well, but the Python packaging ecosystem
has evolved significantly:

* `PEP 621`_ (2021) standardized project metadata in ``pyproject.toml``,
  making ``setup.py`` and ``setup.cfg`` legacy.

* `PEP 735`_ (2024) added dependency groups to ``pyproject.toml``, providing a
  standard way to declare context-specific dependencies (test, docs, CI, etc.)
  — the same problem OEP-18 solved with multiple ``.in`` files.

* `uv`_ emerged as a fast, unified tool that handles dependency resolution,
  locking, virtual environment management, and tool execution in a single
  binary. It natively understands ``pyproject.toml`` and PEP 735 dependency
  groups.

Meanwhile, ``pip-tools`` has not added support for PEP 735 dependency groups,
and continuing to use it means maintaining a parallel dependency declaration
system (``requirements/*.in``) alongside ``pyproject.toml``. Additionally,
`Jazzband`_ — the organization that maintains ``pip-tools`` — announced in
March 2026 that it is `sunsetting`_, leaving the long-term governance and
maintenance of ``pip-tools`` uncertain.

Decision/Consequence
********************

Open edX Python repositories should use **uv** for dependency management:

* **Declare dependencies in** ``pyproject.toml`` using PEP 621 metadata and
  PEP 735 dependency groups. This replaces ``requirements/*.in`` files.

* **Lock dependencies with** ``uv lock``, producing a single ``uv.lock`` file.
  This replaces multiple ``requirements/*.txt`` files generated by
  ``pip-compile``.

* **Install dependencies with** ``uv sync``, which creates and manages the
  virtual environment. This replaces ``pip-sync`` and manual ``python -m venv``
  steps.

* **Run tools with** ``uv run`` when a tool is installed in the project's
  virtualenv (e.g., ``uv run tox``, ``uv run pytest``).

* **Preserve the** ``make upgrade`` **pattern** — the target now runs
  ``uv lock --upgrade`` instead of ``pip-compile --upgrade``.

For test matrices that need multiple versions of a dependency (e.g., Django),
use ``[tool.uv].conflicts`` with separate dependency groups and
``uv-venv-lock-runner`` in tox. This ensures fully reproducible, locked
resolutions for each matrix combination.

Shared constraints (e.g., the global constraints file from ``edx-lint``) are
written into ``[tool.uv].constraint-dependencies`` in ``pyproject.toml`` via
the ``edx_lint write_uv_constraints`` command, since ``uv lock`` does not
accept a ``--constraint`` CLI flag.

Rejected Alternatives
*********************

1. **pip-tools (status quo)**

   pip-tools is mature and well-understood in the Open edX community. However,
   it does not support PEP 735 dependency groups, requires a separate tool for
   virtual environment management, and is significantly slower at dependency
   resolution than uv. Continuing to use it means maintaining
   ``requirements/*.in`` files alongside ``pyproject.toml``, duplicating
   dependency declarations. The `sunsetting of Jazzband <sunsetting_>`_ also
   raises questions about long-term maintenance.

2. **Poetry**

   `Poetry <https://python-poetry.org/>`_ is a popular all-in-one tool, but it
   is opinionated about project structure, uses a non-standard lock format
   (``poetry.lock``), and has limited support for the kind of dependency groups
   needed for Open edX code test matrices (e.g., multiple Django versions). Its
   resolver has historically been slower than uv's.

3. **PDM**

   `PDM <https://pdm-project.org/>`_ supports PEP 735 and produces a standard
   lock format, but has a smaller community and less ecosystem adoption. uv has
   gained broader momentum in the Python packaging space and is backed by the
   same team (Astral) that maintains ``ruff``, which is already widely adopted
   in the broader Python community.

Examples
********

The following examples are drawn from `openedx/sample-plugin`_ and illustrate
the key patterns. See that repository for a complete working reference.

Example pyproject.toml
======================

.. code-block:: toml

   [build-system]
   requires = ["setuptools", "setuptools-scm>8.1"]
   build-backend = "setuptools.build_meta"

   [project]
   name = "openedx-sample-plugin"
   description = "A sample backend plugin for the Open edX Platform"
   requires-python = ">=3.12"
   license = "Apache-2.0"

   dependencies = [
       "Django",
       "djangorestframework",
       "openedx-events",
   ]

   # -- Dependency groups (PEP 735) ------------------------------------------
   #
   # These replace the old requirements/*.in files. Each group maps to a usage
   # context (testing, quality checks, docs, CI tooling, local dev).

   [dependency-groups]
   # Framework-agnostic test deps. Not used directly — included by the
   # version-specific groups below.
   test-base = [
       "pytest-cov",
       "pytest-django",
   ]

   # Current default Django version. Used by quality, docs, and as the default
   # test matrix entry.
   test = [
       {include-group = "test-base"},
       "Django>=5.0,<6.0",
   ]

   # Additional Django versions under test. Each gets its own group so uv can
   # produce a separate locked resolution via [tool.uv].conflicts.
   django60 = [
       {include-group = "test-base"},
       "Django>=6.0,<7.0",
   ]

   quality = [
       {include-group = "test"},
       "edx-lint",
       "pycodestyle",
   ]

   doc = [
       {include-group = "test"},
       "Sphinx",
       "doc8",
   ]

   ci = [
       "tox",
       "tox-uv",
   ]

   dev = [
       {include-group = "quality"},
       {include-group = "ci"},
   ]

   # -- uv configuration -----------------------------------------------------

   [tool.uv]
   # Mutually exclusive groups: uv produces one locked resolution per entry.
   conflicts = [
       [{group = "test"}, {group = "django60"}],
   ]

   #  DO NOT EDIT constraint-dependencies DIRECTLY.
   #  This list is managed by `edx_lint write_uv_constraints`
   #  and will be overwritten the next time `make upgrade` is run.
   #  - GLOBAL constraints: edit edx_lint/files/common_constraints.txt
   #  - REPO-SPECIFIC constraints: edit [tool.edx_lint].uv_constraints in this file
   constraint-dependencies = [
       "Django<7.0",
       "elasticsearch<7.14.0",
   ]

   [tool.edx_lint]
   # Repo-specific uv constraints merged with edx-lint's global constraints.
   # Local entries override global ones for the same package.
   # Run `make upgrade` to regenerate [tool.uv].constraint-dependencies.
   uv_constraints = [
       "Django<7.0",  # this repo tests Django 6.x; overrides global Django<6.0
   ]

Example tox.ini
===============

.. code-block:: ini

   [tox]
   envlist = py312-django{52,60},quality,docs
   requires =
       tox-uv>=1

   [testenv]
   runner = uv-venv-lock-runner
   dependency_groups =
       django52: test
       django60: django60
   commands =
       pytest {posargs}

   [testenv:quality]
   runner = uv-venv-lock-runner
   dependency_groups =
       quality
   commands =
       pylint my_package tests

   [testenv:docs]
   runner = uv-venv-lock-runner
   dependency_groups =
       doc
   commands =
       doc8 docs
       make -e -C docs html

Common commands
===============

.. code-block:: bash

   # Create a virtual environment
   uv venv .venv --seed --python 3.12

   # Install all dev dependencies (creates .venv if needed)
   uv sync --group dev

   # Run tests via tox
   uv run tox

   # Run a single tox environment
   uv run tox -e py312-django60

   # Upgrade all locked dependencies (the new "make upgrade")
   uv lock --upgrade

   # Sync shared constraints from edx-lint into pyproject.toml
   uv run --with edx-lint edx_lint write_uv_constraints

   # Full upgrade sequence (typically wrapped in a Makefile target)
   uv run --with edx-lint edx_lint write_uv_constraints
   uv lock --upgrade

References
**********

* `PEP 621`_ — Storing project metadata in pyproject.toml

* `PEP 735`_ — Dependency Groups in pyproject.toml

* `uv`_ documentation

* `pip-tools`_

* `Jazzband`_ and their `sunsetting`_ announcement

* `openedx/sample-plugin`_ — reference implementation

* :ref:`OEP-18 Python Dependency Management` — the predecessor workflow this decision replaces

Change History
**************

2026-04-24
==========

* Document created
* `Pull request #784 <https://github.com/openedx/openedx-proposals/pull/784>`_

.. Cross-references
.. _pip-tools: https://github.com/jazzband/pip-tools
.. _PEP 621: https://peps.python.org/pep-0621/
.. _PEP 735: https://peps.python.org/pep-0735/
.. _uv: https://docs.astral.sh/uv/
.. _Jazzband: https://jazzband.co/
.. _sunsetting: https://jazzband.co/news/2026/03/14/sunsetting-jazzband
.. _openedx/sample-plugin: https://github.com/openedx/sample-plugin
